[Music]
welcome to the hunor for change podcast
where we explore fresh perspectives with
leading voices in health and science I'm
your host Nas Gustafson and today I'm
honored to welcome Professor Thomas CD a
prestigious biologist and a Pioneer in
the stud of cancer and metabolic
therapist Professor CED earned his PhD
from the University of Illinois orbana
champagne in reaching his expertise
during his p doctoral years at y
University School of Medicine at Boston
College he teaches biology genetics and
biochemistry shaping the minds of
countless students with his insights
into how diseases like cancer epilepsy
and neurod degenerative disorders can be
managed and prevented through
specialized particles like the keto diet
he's the author of the cancer as a
metabolic disease and a contributor to
several leading scientific journals so
let's get ready for a fascinating
conversation with the most prominent
cancer biologist there is welcome
Professor CED well thank you Nicholas
it's nice to be here today there is so
much I want to know about this topic
first of all what does Health mean to
you well I think health is the absence
of illness it's that simple right pretty
much what's your story and how did your
passion for medicine and science all
start well I I came to it by many many
different roads it's it's not um you
know you you you get a degree in
classical genetics and then you work in
in Biochemistry and um you know one
thing leads to another as you're as you
begin to explore parts of Nature and um
it only became clear to us maybe uh 25
or 30 years ago on this cancer
metabolism but but before that it was
pure purely basic science it wasn't
really linking to any disease in the
that people have although we were
working on TX disease it's a lipid
stores disease for many many years I'm
still working on that but you know
there's no straight path to any of this
kind of stuff you just have to follow
where the science leads you and what
your own interests are why do people get
cancer for many reasons I've written
about this how cancer can be initiated
um most of it has to do with uh te the
advance of our diet lifestyle technology
as the origin but how does that happen
in one person versus another or in one
tissue versus another and I broke that
all down in resolving what we call the
oncogenic Paradox uh that term enogen
Paradox was first mentioned by Albert
Zori who won a Nobel Prize a Hungarian
for his work on vitamin C but he raised
the question how is it possible that you
could have so many things that have been
associated with cancer and no one could
figure out the common pathophysiological
mechanism by which guy some guy smokes
some guy gets exposed to chemical
carcinogens some guy gets systemic
inflammation somebody inherits some kind
of a gene some people get exposed to
viruses some people just get get older
how is it possible that all these
conditions can be linked to a
disregulated growth of cells in a
particular tissue which is cancer and
all of it involves chronic disruption of
energy through oxygen oxidative
phosphorilation which is what OT warberg
originally said and which we have
absolutely confirmed as the origin of
cancer so any of those provocative a
agents can elicit uh a chronic
disruption of energy through oxidative
phosphorilation leading to disregulated
cell growth and what we call cancer and
it can happen any time uh in any place
in any kind of an individual but I would
certainly say that our diet lifestyle
today in the western world is a
contributor towards uh damaging
oxidative phosphorilation in some tissue
or cell group could you share what
initially LED you to investigate cancer
as a metabolic disease rather than a
genetic one because in Europe we can
read we can hear that cancer is a
genetic disease and I know that in the
US there is something similar you have
well in according to the National Cancer
Institute is that what it's called in
the US we have something very similar
here and in for example in Sweden it's
called the national Board of Health and
Welfare and um that's what you can read
there and as you might know in in Europe
there are 3,500 people per day that die
in cancer I think the number in the US
is
1,700 so something like that that's true
that's correct so what what led you to
to actually investigate cancer as a
metabolic disease not a genetic one yeah
well I think like most people uh when I
started my career it was clear that for
everyone that read books and textbooks
cancer was considered a genetic disease
I never questioned that it was a silent
assumption you know I'm a I I have a
degree in genetics and uh when it came
to the section about sematic mutations
and germline mutations and things like
this they would discuss various forms of
cancer that seem seem to be associated
with various kinds of mutations and we
would study that and transmit that
information to students but it didn't
occur to me that that that whole
understanding is is incorrect uh until
you actually do the kind of research
that would seriously question the
foundational principles of the of the
theory and I started to do that but I
didn't do it purposefully I did it
because I was seeing things that were
completely inconsistent with the the
dogmatic theory of cancer as a genetic
disease completely inconsistent because
I started to don't forget I worked in
epilepsy for many many years and we were
doing penic metabolic therapy on little
kids with seizures and we began to look
at the physiological changes that happen
to the human body under fasting and
therapeutic conditions and everything
glucose goes down ketones go up and this
is an evolutionally conserved adaptation
in our species uh during the Paleolithic
period of human existence on the planet
our ancestors were all always in in a
state of of ketosis because they didn't
have a lot of high carbo processed foods
in the diet and they had a lot of
exercise all of which put together a
physiological condition that was a semi-
starved State um and that's how how we
evolved and we were studying how
epileptic seizures could be managed by
um these diets and we noticed that um
when glucose was lower and ketones were
elevated many children would uh have
their seizures M and stop seizing well
we had a parallel experim experiment uh
research going on in the in the lab in
brain cancer because we were interested
in the the biochemistry of brain cancer
in the form of of glycolipids do
glycolipids play some sort of a role in
brain cancer and um it became clear uh
as the two two Fields were parallel but
not overlapping uh what I was getting
research grants for studying
biochemistry of of brain cancer and I
was getting re research grants to study
uh metab olic therapy for epilepsy so we
had two parallel programs that were
independent of each other it would only
became clear when we started to look at
a drug that was supposedly blocking
glycolipid biosynthesis and it did but
it also shrunk tumors and we were very
excited about that the company was that
gave me this drug to study uh we were
all very excited but then we learned
that the mechanism of action of the drug
was blocking sucres in the gut
preventing the animal from obtaining
energy from the food they were eating
and we noticed that the blood went down
and the ketones went up just like the
epileptic uh managing seizures and then
when I put the control group of mice in
there because the animals ate the drug
their body weight became smaller and
their blood sugar went down and uh we
said we have to put in a controlled body
weight group with no drug just restrict
the calories of food so their body
weight would be the same as the guys
eating the drug and lo and behold the
tumor shrunk to the exact same degree
whe whether as long as you cut the
calories the it it wasn't the drug
attacking the biochemistry it was the
drug preventing the animal from getting
energy from the food that it ate so then
we started to realize that calorie
restriction how did that block seizures
how did that block brain tumor growth
and it was Elevate the lower glucose
Elevate the ketones so we noticed that a
group from uh Case Western Reserve were
were treating little kids with brain
cancer with ketogenic diets because it
was lowering glucose and elevating
ketones I said wow that seems to be why
would they would they do that and it
turns out they link their findings to OT
warberg I and I always heard of OT wber
I didn't know what he did and um because
OT warberg said cancer cells can't grow
unless they have a significant amount of
sugar glucose I said wow it seems very
similar to the epilepsy thing what's
going on with that and um and these
little kids uh had high-grade gomas and
she clearly showed that the shrinkage of
the tumor was correlated with how low
the blood sugar would go and how high
the ketones went and I said it's the
same thing we're looking at the epilepsy
because we can manage just the same
thing so um calorie restriction I did a
lot of work on epilepsy published some
of the seminal papers and how and how
calorie restriction and ketogenic diets
might stop seizures but we really don't
know the mechanism so I started to shift
over more towards the brain cancer
because it looked like we had a clear
mechanism by which the same therapy that
we use in epilepsy could work even
better in cancer then I started doing a
deep dive on warberg who the hell is
this guy this German uh from the 20th
century and he is a fascinating
character himself half Jew uh why Hitler
kept him alive during the during the
Holocaust and all this kind of stuff
because Hitler feared cancer and um he
knew OT warberg was the leader in the
world at the time and if anybody was
going to cure cancer it would be OT
warberg so Hitler said he should not be
touched so uh um so I and then I started
looking into what warberg research was
all about and he said cancer comes as
the result of chronic disruption of
oxidative phosphorilation that means the
cancer cells don't use oxygen for uh
disregulated growth they they use a
fermentation mechanism which is energy
without oxy and I said wow that that
that's that's really interesting how
come nobody knows this and they said
well because cancer is a genetic
disease and they knew nothing about Oto
orber so um I said well I mean he seems
to he seems to have some uh influence
interesting things here so we we did um
work on brain cancer and we were able to
show un unambiguously that that the
lower the sugar the slower the tumor
went the higher the sugar the faster the
tumor went and uh that tumor cells can't
burn ketones because the oxidative
phosphorilation system is defective so I
immediately said well this is going to
be the way we're going to manage cancer
because the tumor cell can't burn
ketones or fatty acids like normal cells
can so we can shift the entire body over
to nutritional ketosis and bring down
glucose further and then we published
all the mechanisms by which this happens
anti-angiogenic pro- infl
anti-inflammatory pro- aptic so we were
finding killing cancer cells by all of
the standard mechanisms that drugs would
do it but without toxicity so this was a
really an eye opener to us and I thought
that wow this is like the greatest thing
how come the cancer field does not know
about this and and I said uh well uh
everybody knows cancer is a genetic
disease everything else doesn't make any
sense so as a geneticist I started going
in looking at the mutations and where
they come from it turns out that the
defective mitochondria produce reactive
oxygen species which are carcinogenic
and mutogenic so it became clear to me
that all these mutations that people
thought was causing cancer was not they
were the effects they weren't the cause
they were the effects yeah so I said wow
the whole field is studying effects no
wonder we have 1,700 people a day dying
from cancer because they're not studying
the right
thing and um then of course you look at
at the criticisms of OT warberg and they
said warberg was wrong because cancer
cells use oxygen just as effectively as
normal cells so I said really so I
started doing a deep dive on that turns
out that the cancer cells take in oxygen
but they don't use it for energy they
use it for making reactive oxygen
species which cause the mutations in the
nucleus so you got you got to know
what's going on here you have to be a
good biologist and understanding
Evolution to to know what I'm talking
about and it became more and more clear
to me that almost the entire cancer
field had almost no clue about the
disease they were studying they were not
able to make evolutionary connections um
so I started to look at uh evidence from
nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments done by the world's leading
developmental biologists and they
weren't even studying cancer they were
just looking at does a cancer can a can
a nucleus from a tumor cell direct
normal development that was their uh
question and I looked at frog
experiments Mouse experiments human
experim all these different kinds of
experiments where the nucleus of the
tumor cell was placed into a normal
cytoplasm and it was turned cancer
nucleus can direct normal development up
until a per a stage and then development
would abort uh on the other hand when
the nucleus of the normal cell was put
into a tumor cytoplasm what was found
was either dead cells or or neoplastic
tumor cells so I said my God this is
clear evidence that Cancer Cannot Be A
genetic disease it's something in the
cyop plasm what is in the cytoplasm that
might that might be responsible for
disregulated cell growth the
mitochondria did anyone ever say the
mitochondria might be involved yeah OT
warberg said it a long time ago so I
started doing a deep dive on
mitochondria structure and function and
all these different cancer cells and you
have to do electron microscopy work and
I just went back in the literature and I
said look at every major cancer that we
know of in humans and mouse and rats and
all kinds of animals they all have
defective oxidative phosphorilation and
they're all fermenting this is the
simplest damn thing all you have to do
is connect the dots yeah and now we're
realizing that all all major cancers in
in the clinic are known to grow much
faster with the higher blood sugar the
person has yeah and they all know that
if you lower the blood sugar the cancers
grow much much slower so this became
very clear linked to and why because the
mitochondria defective and not only that
we know know that mitochondria control
the cell cycle in other words the
regulation of growth is controlled by
the organel that makes the energy in the
cell so when that when that organel
becomes kaput or dysfun dysfunctional
the cell falls back ancient Pathways of
fermentation that were responsible for
the life uh on the planet before oxygen
came into the atmosphere 2.5 billion
years ago so these cancer cells are
doing nothing more than fermenting the
way all organisms did before because
they grow in the absence of oxygen AO
warberg received his Nobel Prize for for
work by looking by discovering
cytochrome SE oxidase which is the
respiratory enzyme and he showed that
that cancer cells if you pour cyanide on
a cancer cell that they live so cyanide
will kill us real fast but it doesn't
kill a cancer cell because they're not
using oxygen they're fermenters so once
you know they can't live so then we said
what do they ferment uto warberg clearly
said that they ferment glucose yeah and
that was his big thing glucose glucose
glucose but in my book I entertained the
idea for the first time that cancer
cells may also ferment an amino acid
called glutamine everybody in the cancer
field knows that glutamine is a prime
fuel for cancer cells the big problem
they all thought it was respired and I
said you can't they said oh it's respir
it's a respiratory fuel but the cancer
cells can't respire anything so I said
well that's not respiration it has to be
fermentation so I started to look into
this and then I got a hold of the top
guy in the world on this Dr shopis from
SEMO wise so I brought this atten to his
attention that glutamine is fermented he
looked at the data and he clearly said
yes this is a fermentation mitochondrial
fermentation metabolism so you have
fermentation in the cytoplasm according
to what warberg said and what we
discovered is you have fermentation in
the mitochondria mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation is a mitochondrial
fermentation metabolism that can work in
the absence of oxygen this fooled
everybody so they all thought glutamine
was being respired because it's coming
out of the mitochondria they were taken
in oxygen I showed that the o oxygen is
not being used for oxidative
phosphorilation it's being a reactive
oxygen species production and that the
energy coming out of the mitochondria
was coming through a fermentation
metabolism it's unbelievable this
clearly show AO warberg was correct
clear a lot of the mess and now present
the way cancer cells are getting their
energy through a ferment novel
fermentation mechanism so now we know
what cancer is we know where it from and
we know how to manage it the problem is
the rest of the world never heard of
this so you're stuck in this void so uh
to shut off the supply of glucose that's
easy right you can just be on a
ketogenic diet but to shut off the uh
the supply of glutamide that that that's
harder right yeah uh yeah once you know
what you need to do then the strategies
become clear so that's why we developed
the Press
pulse therapeutic strategy where we
pulse glutamine targeting uh glutamine
is an essential am for many functions of
the body if you're if you go in and I
said glutamate glutamine sorry glutamine
yes glutamine glutamine is metabolized
to glutamate yeah glutamate is then
transaminated to Alpha ketoglutarate
which is part of the TCA kreb cycle yeah
right and then Alpha ketoglutarate is
metabolized to sual COA yeah now that
sucal COA contains a phosphate group on
histadine 2 226 I believe which is then
transferred to ADP or GTP to make energy
cancer cells dump out suic acid normal
cells keep suic acid uh that's
metabolized to fumerate and then malate
and around so uh the difference between
normal cells and cancer cells is they
respire and they keep they keep uh suic
succinate in the TCA cycle to be used
for reducing equivalence to do energy
through oxidative phosphorilation an
cells dump out suconic acid into the
media let me give you an example
and this is how we draw information from
different fields of Science and I always
use this when people have a heart attack
uh Cardiac Arrest uh two fuels
immediately appear in the bloodstream
and that's lactic acid and suck inic
acid they immediately appear in the
bloodstream because no more oxygen is
coming into the system the heart stops
beating so in order for the cells to
survive they have to ferment what do
they ferment they ferment glucose and
glutamine okay so immediately you see
the waste products of these inefficient
fermentation
Pathways arise up inside the bloodstream
as soon as the person starts breathing
again the lactic acid and the succinic
acid go back down to Baseline levels
because fermentation is shut off the
difference between a temporary heart
attack and a cancer cell the cancer cell
is locked into the fermentation
metabolism all the time so you always
see lactic acid and succinic acid coming
out of the tumor cells why why because
the mitochondria are uh intrinsically
inefficient in generating energy from
oxidative
phosphorilation in the heart attack the
mitochondria were just inhibited because
there was no oxygen as soon as the
oxygen came back they started to respire
again thereby not needing fermentation
metabolism but when the cancer cell has
a permanent damage to the mitochondria
it's locked into a fermentation
metabolism and there therefore can only
grow only grow with the two fermentable
fuels glucose and glutamine which now
tells us exactly how we're going to
manage the disease we just have to
restrict the glucose and glutamine and
you said it's very easy to do glucose
which it is but it requires some
knowledge of not damaging immune system
gut and urite all the things that
glutamine does and that's why we pulse
the glutamine it's a strategy well it's
going to eventually become the standard
of care I mean because it's it's based
on hard science it's based on a complete
understanding of what's going on in the
cancer cell and enough to know that you
can manage all forms of cancer by
simultaneously restricting glucose and
glutamine while the body is transitioned
to nutritional ketosis I just told you
the solution to the cancer problem we
can manage the cancer much more
effectively without toxicity and uh
overall survival and quality of life
will be significantly improved once
people know that this is how to do it
it's a mitochondrial metabolic disorder
driven by fermentation metabolism and
the only two fermented fuels how do we
know that because we did the experiments
ourselves we we as we throw cancer cells
into uh saline solution which is no food
nothing and then we take a stopwatch and
see how long it takes them to die okay
and they die in 24 hours they're all
dead so then you start adding fuel back
and say what keeps them alive OHA boom
boom you see GL glutamine wow they just
jump up a little bit then you add the
glucose and boom even in Saline Solution
they will grow so uh they grow even
better if you throw in little
micronutrients from the serum and
everything so you know exactly what
these cells and we can't find another
amino acid as powerful as glutamine
we've interrogated these cells uh it's
not like oh we can substitute a
different amino acid they can but very
poor and then they have ask well if
you're going to drive a beast with
inefficient energy you have to have
Pathways that are going to allow that to
come into the cell and you're going to
have to have a logistic supply of these
inefficient fuels in the micro
environment and the most abundant amino
acid in the body is glutamine and
glucose is taken in from almost every
meal that we eat so the fuels for
driving the disregulated growth are
abundant um and we know because if and
yeah they can burn a little bit of
asparagine but there's just a minuscule
amount in the environment so it goes
through that real quick so you got to
have a sustained amount of logistical
supply of fermentable fuels to keep this
regulated growth of the cancer cell so
we give radiation and chemo which free
which makes the body make glucose um oh
it's just incredible most of the stuff
that we do contributes to the demise of
the patients by by damaging their normal
mitochondria and by doing all these
other kinds of things that that uh are
not targeting the essential uh the
necessity the necessity of fermentation
so every everything that I see in the
cancer industry I can explain based the
misunderstanding of what the nature of
the disease is understanding and
misunderstanding of why we get what we
have Okay so this way you can not only
prevent a cancer patient but you can
also cure I don't like to use the Cure
term because it's an arrogant term we
have no clue if you have cancer now
you're a young guy and we do metabolic
therapy and you die at 97 years old from
and you never cancer never came back
then we could say that metabolic therapy
cured you but I can't be sure you might
be managed for 10 15 years and all of a
sudden something comes back um they say
see you didn't cure cancer well we don't
know I mean nobody does anyway so I mean
anything you give somebody they're not
curing anything mean they might have
people that are living longer and yes
there are some people we call cancer
survivors yeah there are many many
cancer survivors throughout the world
whose body tolerated massive poisoning
and radiation and they but they pay a
price and often times cancers come back
in different organs and they die from uh
prematurely from heart disease and liver
failure kidney failure they die from all
these other things because they were
poisoned and irradiated by the inance of
the system so uh uh you know it's called
management we like to we like to use the
term can we manage cancer and the answer
is yes we can manage cancer so my my
father actually died of a kind of cancer
called Myoma kind of blood cancer and he
had it for seven years um before he
eventually died of it and and yeah of
course you could see he was uh the the
cancer treatments they were really hard
on him on him he you know the typical
you lose your hair your immune system
gets uh weak and um that's horrible to
to see for for someone that is near
absolutely it's hard to see for every
kind of these cancer whether it's a gleo
blastoma liver cancer colon cancer
bladder cancer breast cancer they they
all have these horrible uh treatments
and and we know Myoma is also I did we
mitochondria damaged in Myoma all right
okay so what does the Myoma need to
survive glucose and glutamine why was
your father not that they didn't take
glucose and glutamine away he would have
done much better you would not have
suffered like that and that's another
weird thing you say well I'm treated and
my my hair is falling out why why your
hair falls out you're trying to kill
cancer cells aren't you why would you go
bald what what does the air the cancer
cells don't live inside the hair
follicles yeah this tells us they have
no clue understanding of of killing can
we can kill cancer cells by taking away
their glucose and glutamine and
transitioning the normal body over to
ketones that means you don't have to
lose your hair you don't have to suffer
all these horrible side effects because
you know you're specifically targeting
the tumor cells for their incapability
of doing anything other than
fermentation so uh the strategy that we
will develop eventually that will become
the standard of care will involve
managing cancer without
toxicity because we know how to kill
them um and the science is solid So and
I've done all the experiments and many
others have done these experiments
sometimes they just didn't know what
they were looking at but they were
getting the same kind of results yeah it
makes it makes sense what you're telling
me because um I think that my father was
uh that he has had a diabetes and we
didn't know uh but I mean this was 17
years ago and um I came to realize now
after that he probably because he had a
clear sugar addiction he he loved sugar
everything with sugar he was just
um he loved it so I think that he has a
diabetes and this makes sense what
you're telling me so what are the
primary risk factors for to cancer well
I think you just said diabetes yeah um
uh
elevated sugar creates systemic
inflammation and inflammation will
damage oxidative phosphorilation
mitochondrian in some cells you know
your your dad got Myoma but other people
with uh type 2 diabetes get colon cancer
uh sometimes they get breast canc it
doesn't it can be very individual kinds
of whatever whatever cell is damaged by
this and sometimes it's a combination of
damage uh you know obesity is now
replacing smoking as a number uh uh
major cause of cancer but that's often
associated with type two diabetes so so
you have diabetes obesity uh lack of
exercise uh you have a whole variety
exposure to chemical carcinog any any
combination of these risk factors
together uh can can damage oxidative
phosphorilation in some population of
cells and some tissue so uh but we all
know they're all linked to a common
pathophysiological mechanism which is
dysfunctional oxos coupled to a to a
compensatory fermentation of glucose and
glutamine no matter what where they come
no matter where they are they all have
common uh got common phenotype and um
but they're all genetically different so
when you do genetic analysis you know
the mutations that you see in Myoma may
be different from colon cancer may be
different from breast cancer and as a
matter of fact if you look at any if you
take a tumor out of someone's body a
solid tumor uh or even blood cells blood
cancers and you look at each cell and
then you do an expansion of the genome
in that cell and do a complete genomic
sequence of all the different kinds of
genetic alterations every there's no two
cells in a tumor despite the hundreds of
millions of cells in the tumor there's
no two cells that have the same genetic
mutations yet every cell in the tumor is
fermenting so the what the what the
cancer field because they're locked into
the incorrect Theory they think it's a
genetic disease and therefore they're
going to try to Target genetic mutations
and try to manage manage the disease
that way and you hear them all talking
about what kind of mutation this guy has
or that guy has they they might have
that for sure but but not every cell in
their tumor has the same mutation now
here's the situation every cell in that
tumor is fermenting so what they failed
to realize that I could do a much better
job at killing all the tumor cells if I
Target the common problem that all the
cells have rather than some of the
unique problems that only few of the
cells have now as as what I just said to
you does that seem complicated does let
me ask you that does that no it doesn't
seem complicated well how in the hell is
all the major cancer centers in the
world not know that so what is the
answer the answer is I in fact I don't
know it's perplex thing I I sometimes I
I I sometimes think I'm I'm talking to
plug sockets and things I I I have no
idea what I what I think is is a is a
Dogma it's an ideology I I think they
have been so brainwashed indoctrinated
to think this is a genetic disease they
can't think of anything else and and
actually Leo to tolto said the same
thing the Russian uh author he said it's
sometimes easier to explain a
complicated thing to a simple person and
a simple thing to a guy who's already
made up his mind what he thinks he knows
it about already and I think right the
ideological Dogma is more so powerful on
the brain you can't think outside your
dogmatic View and if you were ra it's
like a religion a Dogma you're
indoctrinated brainwashed into a way of
thinking and no matter what someone says
you cannot you cannot uh transition from
one dogmatic view to another it's a
lockh hold on rational thinking and uh
the the cancer industry has come to
realize that cancer is a genetic disease
and it's a lock hold on their brain and
they can't think outside that and then
of course you have the revenue
generation system the people make
billions of dollars on treating cancer
that might be one of the explanations
right the economic interests behind yeah
you can't get a a man to recognize
something when his salary depends on him
not recognizing it so um I you put all
that together and you have a complete
resistance to moving the field forward
for a variety of different reasons so
what do you think has to happen for
these health professionals to open their
minds outside the the that this imposed
Dogma I think when you start to see
people uh who were given terminal
diagnosis uh walking around living far
longer with healthier quality of life
eventually there's enough of these
people are going to walk around and
they're going to say to the doctor I
want to be like that guy can can you
treat me like that guy who's alive over
there and yeah and you know so I I think
it's the evidence that eventually comes
from seeing people who were given
terminal diagnoses who are not terminal
or Alive far longer than their diagnosis
you know they always say oh he's got
nine months to live or he's got maybe a
year left who are these people to say
that you know but do you see this
happening anytime soon I mean working
with future the future generation of
health professionals are things looking
brighter I think so because the word is
starting to get out and you know you can
only deny the science for so long I mean
I go back and look how long it took the
Catholic church to accept the fact that
the uh sun was the center of the solar
system you know back in those days they
burn Bruno Gano at the stake in Rome for
cry Al burned his ass up for when he
challenged the dogma and then the
Galileo was house arrested so it took uh
the scient they didn't even want to look
in the microscope uh in the telescope to
prove that Galileo was supporting Kernan
Theory and the clerics didn't even want
to look in the in them in the telescope
to prove what they were saying so it
took centuries for the C for the church
to accept this uh this fact and now we
know of course the sun is the center of
the solar system but there was a time
when that was not accepted because you
were challenging the power to be and the
power to be
was that the humans uh we were the
center and the church was the center of
our existence and when that when you
found out that was not the case uh you
were challenging power and when you
challenge power you can get a backlash
and in those days that they burn you up
or house arrest you so today they ignore
you they just ignore it but I mean look
what happened with the fearing saturated
fat uh that was U something that people
thought for 60 70 years but now it's
it's been it's it's a myth that has been
debunked but uh that was recently which
one was that I mean animal fats butter
and L and you know we evolved on animal
fats I mean you're you're killing an
elephant you don't think there's any fat
on his body I mean uh we live to kill
animals but I mean it took us 60 70
years to to debunk that M yeah well I
think um you know for the nutrition guys
uh they're they're all messed up anyway
you know when you have up upside down
food pyramids and all this kind of stuff
um but you know we're I try to select
what I do I mean right now we've got
people dying 1700 people A Day in the
United States like you said 3,000 in
Europe and because of incorrect Theory
so the they're dying as the result of an
incorrect theory of the nature of the
disease so if if your job is to uh bring
the attention that the theory of cancer
it's a it's called a mitochondrial
metabolic disorder it's not a genetic
disorder so you have two competing
theories the mutation Theory which says
that cancer is caused by somatic
mutations that lead to disregulated cell
growth or the mitochondrial metabolic
Theory saying that the disregulated cell
growth is the result of a transition
from oxos to fermentation and the
mutations which are there are secondary
Downstream effects not the cause so this
is the this is the the whole thing right
once they the science becomes clear you
operate under a theory and the theory if
the theory is correct the outcomes will
be better because you understand the
situation better right now the field
persists with toxic chemicals and
radiation and immunotherapies which are
all based on the sematic mutation Theory
so they're not going to be optimal in
managing cancer for the majority of
people on the planet you realize it's a
metabolic disorder you will get
management and greater much greater uh
capability so your question is how do we
get the field to know that why don't you
read the damn literature and understand
it for yourself because they don't do
that they rely on some other guy telling
them what to think so uh it's hard for
people to think we have mostly followers
in this world there's only a few
thinkers and that can be very good or
very bad for certain things we were
talking about the nutrition and you
mentioned the the food pyramid being
turned upside down right does meat cause
cancer no of course not you know what
the hell man how do meat going to damage
mitochondria we have all eat meat for
Christ's sake you know and we look at
the uh Paleolithic uh men we look at
Aboriginal tribes that follow their
standard diet Lifestyles cancer is
unheard of right so um I mean we evolved
to eat meat if we didn't eat meat we
would you and I would never have this
conversation we would have been extinct
right of course eat meat we didn't
involve to eat grass you know or
vegetables I mean we would have been
dead extinct extinct and and yes sweet
things as a species we love sweet things
because sweet was so rare in Paleolithic
times where you going to get something
sweet you think there's a doughnut shop
on every on every corner you know um no
you know where are we going to get Cakes
and Pastries and all this kind of stuff
we didn't have it so we would have honey
and and uh we'd have to learn how to
make the bees uh indolent while we could
get the honey so I always wanted to know
who is the first guy to smoke smoke bees
so they wouldn't sting you while you
could collect the honey because the
dumbass bear has to get his face all
stung because he's not smart enough to
know how to make the bees indolent
what about what about obesity do you do
would you say that obesity is a disease
no of course not I mean who there's a
you know we have so many jackasses
people who have no functional brain
cells I me stupid stuff like that you
know we evolved to store energy if we
didn't store energy we would have not
existed on the planet all of a sudden
we're put into an environment where all
of the things we've always craved are
now at our at our fingertips and all of
a sudden we become obese as a matter of
fact those people who don't understand
Evolution they don't understand
biological evolution obesity is
evolution in action this is what happens
when we evolved over hundreds of
thousands of years in the absence of
high carbohydrate foods and then all of
a sudden you put that same organism in
an environment with an abundance of high
carbohydrate Foods our natural ability
to store energy is is there and you get
very very fat because the fattest people
are the great are the descendants of
those that survived the hardest times
hundreds of thousands of years ago so
obesity is evolution in action and
that's what it is we evolve to store
energy that was the way we could survive
human beings are
remarkably able to go for long periods
of time without food but because we have
this incredible capability because we
moved we moved out of our original uh
original space in Africa we came we
survived ice ages and we surv movement
all over the planet because we can go we
move and we store energy and now all of
a sudden we're in environments where we
no longer move we're sedentary and we're
eating highly processed carbohydrate
foods and it's we get fat when I hear
what you say it's you mean that we have
a significant amount of control when it
comes to whether we develop cancer in
our lifetimes is that is that right
absolutely but the problem is that that
knowledge is not generally known you
can't believe how many people never do
not know that obesity is linked to
cancer they don't have any um oh I
didn't know that I didn't know well you
don't read anything you know you gota I
I I in my University I spent a lot of
time scientific literacy it could save
your life most people have no they're
they it's AB they have no scientific
literacy they don't how to interpret
data they don't look at things they have
no clue how their body works but you're
absolutely 100% right uh most of cancers
can be prevented the problem is when you
tell people how do I prevent cancer well
you got to really restrict your ability
to eat highly processed carbohydrates
and you have to exercise a lot more just
like our paleo lithic ancestors that
didn't have cancer well I'm not sure I
want to do that well then that's your
choice now now the problem of course is
that smoking smoking was very common
everywhere at least in the United States
maybe in Europe I don't know what they
Europe as well you know and everybody
knew smoking cigarettes would put you at
risk for cancer and um uh all kinds of
other diseases you know lung diseases
and all kinds of stuff but people
contined to smoke even though they knew
the risk factor but it only became uh uh
changed when when your smoking habit
puts someone else at risk for help uh so
secondhand smoke you're you're bothering
me you're hurting my child with you're
smoking and then the society said oh we
can't we can't smoke inside anymore you
have to go outside and it became a
societal peer pressure kind of
restriction because your habit was
putting my health at risk the Obesity
problem is is not doing that directly
that fat guy sitting on the bench is not
affecting my personal health right
another problem sorry is is that
children they have sugar since they are
one or two years old and children at
that age Never Smoke right and and now
now we're getting children that are
obese yeah and uh and what's happening
is that when I was a kid
eating sugar cereals and but we were we
were outside running and jumping and
climbing all the time yeah yeah we
weren't sitting in front of computers
and cell phones we didn't have any of
that stuff so now you eat all the sugar
cereals and you go to the next room and
you you work on your cell phone all day
long or or chat or whatever and that's
lack of exercise lack of exercise lack
of sun exposure lack of fresh air lack
of grounding being uh separated from
nature completely 100% absolutely and
you put all that together and you create
an environment that's going to
contribute to a broad range of chronic
diseases yeah that Society now now must
spend more and more money on expensive
therapies that are draining The Wealth
of Nations into into treating a
preventable
condition that's basically what it is so
you know um and makes jobs and makes M
money for a lot of Industries a lot of
people get rich doing this stuff so
maybe it's good for the economy I don't
know you know um I mean if you say to a
cancer patient you have a very valuable
function your sickness is is generating
a large Revenue generating industry
keeping Maj major uh Western societies
uh functional so be thankful that you
have this contributed you can't say that
to a person with cancer no it's
insensitive but that's the truth um and
their sicknesses is driving huge
Industries yeah uh and I'm coming along
saying maybe maybe we can live longer oh
no can't do that we don't want
that so talking about living longer um
Professor CED how I mean could you
explain the relationship between aging
and cancer risk do you believe that
cancer is inevitable if we just live
long enough no I don't believe it's
inevitable I mean we have people that
are centurions that are dying from
basically from old age yeah uh would
never have cancer is it if you continue
uh diet Lifestyles that put you at risk
then for sure cancer becomes more common
in older folks what I'm seeing now
though which is really uh shocking is
the younger and younger people getting
cancer it's unbelievable I mean in 20s
and 30s with colon cancer and breast
cancer and this kind of thing this this
is like something's something's going on
here yeah in society something some some
something is going on is this a change
that you've seen recently yes absolutely
I would say within the last 10 years
we're seeing much really yeah much more
and it's all linked to our diet
lifestyle issues but as far as longevity
don't forget there's the mitochondrial
Theory of Aging it's called the second
entropy Second Law thermodynamics uh
which is disorder So eventually our
bodies give out uh and we and we die uh
because uh disorder uh we reach
equilibrium where the Energy Efficiency
in our body is no longer capable of
preventing us from ing equilibrium and
that's usually a generalized failure in
mitochondrial uh uh energy I always like
to look at Queen Elizabeth from England
who passed away not long ago I mean one
day I always say she's like healthy and
shaking the hand of the the new British
prime minister that only lasted a week
or so I can't remember how long it was
but then two days later the poor woman's
dead and and and I'm saying and she and
she died of old age and this is the way
people are supposed to die you're
supposed to be healthy right up until
until your body realizes that the second
law of Thermodynamics has overtaken uh
your ability to remain away from
equilibrium and that's the natural way
of of things cancer is acceler
accelerated entropy so essentially your
body is aging faster through a variety
of pressures on the thermodynamic SEC
other words you're accelerated the
second law of Thermodynamics so uh and
and to be exposed to radiation and
chemicals damages mitochondria and
healthy tissue there by enhancing uh the
second law of Thermodynamics entropy
putting you at risk for dying earlier
than someone who was not exposed to
these mitochondrial damaging agents so
you can put it all together if you
understand evolutionary biology and and
biochemistry you can kind of make sense
out of what what's happening in most
folks so you already mentioned um how we
can prevent cancer could you go a little
into how we can use f fting as targeting
I mean targeting cancer cells is that is
that a way you it's very difficult to
get cancer in healthy mitochondria so if
the mitochondria is respiring yeah that
cell is not fermenting because
respiration is efficient and what we
have found through bioenergetic studies
with my late colleague Richard vich from
the NIH um when you burn ketones you
produce less reactive oxygen species you
maximize the Energy Efficiency of
mitochondria how do you elevate ketone
well you're in nutritional ketosis will
keep your mitochondria super healthy uh
thereby preventing cancer from
developing and many other chronic
diseases uh for that matter and that's
the way uh we evolved as a species the
nutritional ketosis now of course our
our ancestors during the Paleolithic
period would die from infections and
they would die from broken bones and
they would die from things that we now
can correct with modern medicine
medicine but at the same time we put we
can correct some things and then we put
ourselves at risk at risk for other
things so mitochondria health is
ultimately responsible for how long you
can live on the planet uh uh in a in a
in a healthy or UND diseased uh state so
um yeah so cancer prevention but as I
said doesn't seem like most people are
interested in prevention because we have
an obesity epidemic and then of course
if you have cancer then the way to
Target that is remove the fermentable
fuels while allowing the rest of the
cells of the body to be healthy by
burning ketones so you protect the
normal cells while simultaneously
targeting the tumor cells so we have we
published this in the Press pulse I
published a big paper on this this is
the framework by which we're going to
manage all cancers that will be
eventually the standard of care and now
we're working out dosage timing and
scheduling of the various drugs and
procedures that will all work together
in a unified hold enhancing the health
of the normal cells while restricting
the viability of the tumor cells it's
all based on evolutionary biology and
biochemistry uh uh that was not all
connected together like we like we've
done what about the plastic pollution
does microplastics impact our health
when it comes to cancer yeah because
what happens is the microplastics are
are collected in cells uh this is the
way asbestos was another kind of a
non-degradable kind of molecule asbestos
is considered a carcinogen uh because it
creates systemic infl
in cells that would take up the asbest
particles thereby creating uh oxidative
stress on mitochondria leading to uh to
reduced oxos in a compens with a
compensatory fermentation it's possible
that the accumulation of Plastics in
various cells uh will have the same kind
of an effect as does aestus maybe not as
acutely for sure but you put that in an
environment where blood sugars are high
and exercise is low and you put higher
risk
yeah yeah we can explain most of the
most of these things because we thought
about them we think we the questions you
ask me we talk about all the time and we
think about it and we look at the
scientific literature to see if there's
any evidence to support these the to get
more clear answers to these things and
the answer is yes when it comes to I
mean different kinds of cancer we
mentioned Myoma it could be skin cancer
lung cancer are there different cures or
you didn't want to use the name cure you
said management right or how to deal
with the cancer is that different when
it comes to each kind of cancer yeah
well this is the the big thing everybody
thinks all these cancers are different
from each other they're not how do I
know that because I went through the
scientific literature over years and
looked at all the different kinds of
cancers and they all have the same kind
of problem lung cancer colon cancer
bladder cancer they have damage
oxidative phosphorilation and the other
thing that's very interesting that we
just we have a paper under review now uh
all these canc
um regardless of what kind they are they
have these lipid droplets in the
cytoplasm you're going to love this um
if you look at them under the microscope
you see all these vacul in the cancer
cells Myoma bladder breast doesn't make
any difference they got all these vules
so the field thinks that the cancer cell
needs so much energy they're going to
they're using lipids so fast that they
need to store them for energy just the
in fact we have shown it's just the
opposite they store the fatty acids
because the mitochondria defective and
they can't burn them so so we see lipid
droplets and the cytoplasm of all major
cancers and we see mitochondrial
abnormalities in all major cancers
they're the same damn disease it just
happens in different cells this is a
hard pill to swallow for the entire
cancer industry where they're saying oh
we have the therapy for your cancer or
we have a different therapy this is
absurd these people have no clue they I
should say these people should
understand
the real the bi how is it possible that
the bi that they that they don't know
the biology of the disease they're
working with is it possible that we have
people treating other human beings uh on
this planet uh and and the person
treating the the patient and the treater
neither of them have any knowledge about
the bi biology was being
treated the blind leading the blind in
this kind of
situation it's an embarrassment to our
species I can't believe we allowed
ourselves as a as a rational thinking
species to become so clueless when it
comes to any of the stuff that I'm
speaking about is there anything that
you would like to add something that you
think that I missed that our listeners
need to know yeah I think I think that
the field will change dramatically once
people realize that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder and not
a genetic disorder and and you you want
to see how fast you're going to get
slapped down go to all your top cancer
clinics and you tell them that and
they'll throw you out saying you're some
sort of a nut um some sort of a psychic
Psychopathic guy this guy's running and
and you see so you listen to what I say
it makes perfect sense I have all the
scientific evidence to support it's in
the scientific literature and then when
you go to the Oncology Clinic they never
heard of anything I me let people let
your listeners go and try it and see
what they think let them go and see
they'll say glucose is no no not a
problem glucose is good for cancer get
your glucose as high as you can I mean
it's like nuts so you living in two two
different worlds here yeah um and that's
the evidence you want to know just go
and know that but I tell you we can't
make any major progress in managing
cancer until people realize and the
field comes to realize it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder and
it's not a genetic disorder and once we
make that we'll drop the death rate
significant let's hope that this changes
then soon uh are there any exciting new
projects that you're working on well I
think we're working on diet drug combos
uh where we can some of these Cancer
drugs that have been thrown in the in
the can for a lack of eacy we're pulling
back out of the can and we're showing
that they're extremely powerful when
used under the right dietary conditions
so we're going to open up a whole new
field of research by reexamining many
drugs that were thought to be
ineffective or too toxic uh and show
that Under The Right Use under the right
dietary condition in certain change
dosages some of these drugs that were so
so-call promising uh uh are actually
very very therapeutic it's just that you
need to know how to use them in the
right conditions so you know we've
thrown so many different drugs into the
can because they were causing too much
toxicity and killing people uh we're
finding we're resurrecting some of these
drugs and showing oh my God they're
extremely powerful when you have a
patient in nutritional ketosis why why
are we throwing them all away so we're
going to re re reinvigorate the drug
industry when they realize that their
drugs can have new power when placed in
a patient under the right dietary a
metabolic condition Professor cord where
can people find you all of the major
papers that we have published are on the
web Open Access so anybody who would
like to because I can't do a thorough
deep discussion on the biochemistry in a
short period of time so you have to see
the evidence for yourselves uh breast
cancer brain answer we've done all these
different kinds of things and um yeah
Open Access you can anybody with a
computer can go out to Google and pull
up our our scientific papers and they
can read them for themselves and then if
they they think we're right they can
make donations to my research at Boston
College right on the my my faculty web
page or they can support the foundation
don't forget all of our research is
coming from private foundations and
philanthropy really so philanthropy
there are guys I keep telling there are
rich people who who who want to be a
part of this transitional change and um
they're willing to support our research
because we're moving forward faster than
any of the other avenues of research uh
even though most of the people ignore
what we're saying but uh there we be sh
to be correct because we have the
science behind us is there a message
that you would like to send to the young
Generations that will be the future of
science and health advancements that's a
good point because they have not yet
been indoctrinated and uh they can have
an open mind and they can test what I'm
saying themselves and also in animals
dogs uh our evidence is really strong
when you see these dogs that are all
dying from cancer and they and you're
reversing their cancer or destroying the
tumors by transitioning the diets of the
dogs I published the big paper on that
they can they can look yeah metabolic
therapy for Mass cell cancer in the dog
so um the dogs respond just as well as
the humans humans respond the best mice
are not the I use mice to get the work
but the mices don't respond near as well
as dogs are humans so uh just something
for people to
recognize but I but I think yeah so I
think you you've asked a lot of very
very good questions and I think that um
my answers could be uh the way I deliver
my my answers uh but but that people can
get the the Deep science if you go right
to the papers and see this we will add
some links to the when we post this uh
this discussion this podcast if they
have scientific literacy they willing to
open their minds they'll see the
evidence for what I'm saying Professor c
s thank you so much this has been really
fascinating it's been very interesting
and I appreciate very much that you took
your time to share your wisdom with us
thank you yeah thank you very much too
nice speaking with you thank you so much
for listening to the Hunger for change
podcast I hope you enjoyed the episode I
also wanted to take a moment to talk
about naturally my brand of healthy food
products and naturally we are in a
mission to change the world through what
we eat this this is why we worked so
hard to make products that are delicious
and also good for you they're all
gluten-free have no refined sugars no
sweeteners and no additives at the
moment natural is only available in
Europe however we're working to expand
to other continents so stay tuned if
you're in Spain you can head over to our
website naturally.com and it will take
you to our online store and if you're in
Italy Portugal Germany Poland France the
Netherlands or in Sweden you can find
them on Amazon I will leave you all
these links in the description anyway so
that you can find them thank you so much
for listening and stay tuned for the
next episode
[Music]